[Music] Good day everyone I'm Norman Wildberger
we're looking at box arithmetic today I want to
give some applications of relatively simple
box arithmetic at the poly number level to an
interesting topic in modern algebra SL analysis
Slumber Theory combinatorics namely Q Series now
if you're interested in this topic and want to
know more about it I have an entire series on
this topic in the wild egg mathematics courses
channel so the story of Q Series perhaps starts
with Oilers pentagonal number theorem which is
a formula for obtaining a certain sequence of
numbers called pentagonal numbers which are sort
of five-fold analoges of triangular numbers and
the formula is is given by this infinite product
1us Alpha to the N anding going from 1 to Infinity
okay 1 - Alpha * 1 - Alpha 2 * 1 - Alpha cubed
Etc and as I've explained also in my wild egg Mass
courses uh and there the advice for um research
mathematicians there talk about processes and a
kind of convergence of processes that can allow us
to think about what's happening with the identity
in something like this without having to resort
to you know infinite completed processes so what
we're doing here is we're trying to expand
this much as it as if it was a polinomial and
uh and looking at various powers and happily any
particular power like Alpha to the 5 only occurs
a finite number of times it's the critical thing
that allows you sort of to have a well-defined
result of this thing and it's a very interesting
sequence with plus and minuses and uh and these
um these rather interesting numbers and it's
particularly important because of a remarkable
connection that Oiler realized with the partition
function so if P of n is the number of partitions
of n number of ways of writing a natural number
as a sum of other natural numbers like P of five
is seven because you can write five as five or
4 + 1 or 3 + 1 + 1 or 3 + 2 or 2 + 2 + 1 or uh
2 + 1 + 1 + 1 or 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 + one so this
actually gives a recursive um way of computing
this P of n function and you see that these uh
these terms here correspond exactly to the uh
to the the exponents and and the signs that are
appearing up here okay so the question question
we want to address today is can we express this
kind of ongoing identity in the context of box
arithmetic so a good place to start is with
a finite version and we'll just have a quick
review of box arithmetic so if we just look at
the first two terms 1 - Alpha * 1 - Alp 2 that's
1 - Alpha - Alp s + Alpha cubed so how might we
express that in box arithmetic first of all a
quick review in box arithmetic these days we have
two zeros the black zero the red zero this is zero
and this is antizero and one of my viewers made
the interesting suggestion that I should think of
something that makes the the red a littleit more
visible to the black for color blind people so I'm
going to try to make this red box typically more
oval-shaped so it will have rounded corners and
perhaps be a little bit thicker uh so hopefully
that will uh distinguish it more clearly from
the black ones are going to be right angled sharp
rectangles okay so those are the zero and then a
natural number is a box of zeros and the boxes
can be either black or red boxes so this thing
here is the basic new object a box inside a box
so that's like a box containing zero that's the
definition of the number one while the number two
is a box like this with two black boxes inside it
and if we have a black box with a red box inside
it then that's minus one or anti-1 and The crucial
thing is that if you add this box to this box by
that we mean we dump out the contents into another
box okay uh then the black box and the red box
being inside the same box they annihilate that's
the crucial particle anti-particle property of
these black and red objects okay so that's why
we get minus one okay and then going down one
level to the polinomial version or poly numbers
as I prefer to call them if we have a box inside
a box inside a box so that's a box containing one
one that's a new object we'll call it Alpha and
then minus Alpha you get by um making red the top
innermost box okay if we make the inside box red
then we get Alpha to the minus one here's what
Alpha squar looks like and so on okay so now let's
look at 1 - Alpha * 1 - Alpha squ okay so here is
1- Alpha it's a box containing an empty box there
so that's like the number one if this thing wasn't
here that would be the number one and if this
thing wasn't here we would have minus Alpha this
one right here so this is the combination of this
one and this one the sum of this one and this one
1 + minus Alpha if we take 1 - Alpha squar then we
are taking the sum of this swing then we're taking
the sum of this one with minus Alpha squ so minus
Alpha squ is obtained by taking this thing and
making red that um biggest inner box okay namely
that one there so how do we multiply boxes well we
just take all possible sums of entries in this box
and entries in this box so this one here this is 0
plus 0 is 0 0 plus this is just this this plus 0
is just itself so the only other wise interesting
one is this box with this box so we have a red
box with a black one inside it another red box
with two black boxes inside it and we're adding
them well to add boxes we dump them all in so we
dump them all in we're going to get three black
boxes but what is the color of the bounding new
box that's determined by the number of red boxes
that are contributing to the sum there are two
red boxes contributing to the sum so it's like a
parody kind of thing so the two odds make an even
and we get a black box as a result okay and then
we confirm that that is indeed the same as 1us
Alpha minus Alpha 2 plus Alpha cubed so this is
a way of doing it with a very primitive sort of
Assembly Language box arithmetic let's have a look
at the same computation but just at a little bit
higher level by looking at Poly numbers as boxes
of natural numbers okay so 1 minus Alpha in terms
of that would be a box with a zero and a one anti
the one anti is a red box with a black box inside
it a black box with a black box inside it is one
a red box with a black box inside it is the anti
of one that's a new kind of mathematical object
that hasn't been in existence up till now okay
but it's playing an important role because it's
a constituent of this box box here to create this
element for us in a box setting and similarly 1
- Alpha squ is the Box consisting of zero and two
anti so when we multiply these we have to add all
possible ingredients so 0 + 0 is 0 0 + 2 anti is
2 anti 1 anti plus 0 is 1 anti and 1 anti plus 2
anti is like 1 + 2 it's three but is there an anti
or a not anti well there's an anti and an anti
there's two antis they sort of cancel out and
we just have um a single three so again we get
one- Alpha - Alpha S Plus Alpha cubed but this
will be a little bit easier for for most people
to recognize because it's very much just like
doing integer or natural number arithmetic with
the provisor that there are these anes floating
around so we have to sort of take proper care of
them but that's not too hard so here is another
example just going up one more degree 1 - Alpha *
1 - Alp 2 * 1 - Alpha cubed so there is 1 - Alpha
there's 1 - alpha s and there's 1 - Alpha cubed
and then when we form the product of these things
we have to form all possible sums okay like 0
plus 0 plus 0 that's zero uh the ones involving
two zeros are one anti plus 0 plus 0 that's
one anti or 0 + 2 anti plus 0 that's that one
or 0 + 0 plus 3 anti that's three anti the one's
just involving a single uh like 0+ one anti plus
2 anti that's three or 0 plus um 2 anti plus 3
anti that's five or uh 0 + 1 anti plus 3 anti
that's four and finally 1 anti plus 2 an plus 3
anti is six anti because there's an odd number
of anes okay so there are eight constituents Al
together the eight different possible sums of
of taking one element here one element here one
element here now of course at this level here we
see the crucial cancellation this three and this
three anti are going to mutually annihilate each
other crucially they do not give us a zero we're
not getting zero we're getting nothing like a real
nothing okay uh not just a symbol for nothing
which is in fact something we're just actually
getting nothing just completely disappears and
we just get 0 1 anti 2 anti 4 5 6 anti which is
the same as 1 - Alpha - Alpha 2 plus Alpha 4 plus
Alpha 5 - Alpha 6 which is what you get when you
expand this thing out okay so now let's make the
big jump to try to understand Oiler pentagonal
formula in this context of box arithmetic but
definitely we have to step outside the bounds
of what we've been doing up till now because now
we're not just working with finite numbers of
finite objects because we have this unbounded
product and this unbounded sort of sum as the
result of it but nevertheless we can understand
this in the context of box arithmetic in a modest
fashion in a modest sort of unbounded fashion
so we don't pretend that we can go to infinity
or any nonsense like that okay we recognize and
resp ECT the ongoing nature of both this product
and this sum but we have a precise meaning to the
identity of this equaling this in the sense that
you know of equating the number of times a given
object appears on the right hand side and on the
left hand side okay so how does that go so well
here's the 1 - alpha 1 - alpha squ 1 - Alpha Cub
1 - Alp 4 Etc okay so we have all of these things
and we have to take this unbounded product so what
we mean by that is we're going to take sums okay
but we're going to take sums that we can actually
do and we really can only do finite sums so that
means that we have to insist that the entries that
we take are mostly zeros in other words we're
only going to take a finite number of nonzero
entries in this sum we're just doing addition
okay but we're not allowed to say okay what is
this 1 a plus this 2 A plus this 3 a plus this
4 a etc we're not taking that kind of sum we're
only taking a finite number of any of them okay
that's by agreement that's what we mean okay and
so then what we can do is we can tabulate how
many times we get various things okay so when
we look at this thing here now uh there's only
one way of getting a zero 0 plus 0 plus 0 plus
0 to get a one or one anti those only only one
way of doing that to take that one anti and the
others are chosen to be zeros to get a two only
the two anti there and zeros elsewhere to get a
three well we could do that in one way by taking
that three only that three so when I just say
that three it means the rest zeros or we could
take this one anti and that two anti if we add
those we're also going to get a three because one
anti plus 2 anti is three so we're going to get a
three anti as well as a three and they're going to
annihilate each other that's why there's no three
here why is there no four well because there's a
four anti that we get just by taking that one by
itself or we could take this one anti and this
three anti when we add them we get four that's
going to cancel with this four anti so there's no
four in there how about five well there's a five
anti sitting there so we take that five anti or
we could take a one anti and a 4 anti that would
actually cancel with that one or we could take a
2 anti and a three anti so that's one five left
over that's why there's a five there okay and
um okay and then we can carry on to make this
this this calculation uh but it's not you know
a prior clear what the pattern is this pattern
here is very regular but the pattern that it
generates is um you know pretty interesting
although Oiler figured out what the pattern
was and was a very interesting and important
pattern but it's not entirely obvious um at
first so this is a calculation that should be
done in quotes it's not covered by what we've
talked about in box arithmetic so far it's an
extension of what we've been doing and involves
sort of unbounded or open boxes so I'm sort of
leaving this one open you know suggesting that
the thing carries on to me it would be some kind
of intellectual dishonesty to put a bar there and
to pretend that this is a closed thing that we can
get the entire thing no it just keeps on going
beyond our view that's the honest historical
way of thinking about such sums now of the many
hundreds of remarkable formulas in Q Series um I'm
going to just choose one more here to talk about
today uh which is also due to Oiler and also a
very interesting uh and important uh discovery
of his it's concerning a very similar kind of
product product of one plus ala to the end now so
a plus sign here so we have 1 + Alpha * 1 + alpha
s * 1 + Alpha cubed and that turns out to be this
series that starts this way with three dots of
course 1 + Alpha plus alpha s + 2 Alpha Cub +
2 Alp 4+ 3 Alpha 5th + 4 Alpha the 6 and keeps
going in some fashion which is not entirely
obvious and remarkably Oiler realized first of
all what the significance of this thing was that
this was counting something pretty interesting in
fact it was counting the number of partitions of
an integer n into distinct parts so five can be
subdivided or partitioned into distinct Parts
either as five or S 4 + 1 or S 3 + 2 okay and
the other ones don't count like 2 plus 2 plus 1
doesn't count because it has two repeated twos
or or 3 + 1+ 1 doesn't count Etc so there's only
three partitions of five into distinct parts so
that's what that's counting and he by a little
bit of clever algebraic manipulation was able to
convince himself that this is actually the same
as this product product of 1 over 1 - Alpha to 2
nus one so we're taking the the fraction uh 1/ 1
- Alpha * 1 - Alpha cubed 1 - Alp 5 and um and in
this context it turns out that this is then allows
him to deduce that this number is also equal to
the number of partitions of n into odd Parts into
odd parts so for example five is equal to five and
it's also equal to 3 + 1 + 1 all the parts are odd
or it's equal to 1 plus 1 plus 1 plus 1 plus one
all the parts are odd there's three of those so
these two numbers are the same and that's not at
all obvious but it's a result of this algebraic
um identity here because these two series are
encoding these two things so this remarkable
work done in 1740 so let's have a look at this
first thing how would we think about this from a
box point of view so 1 plus Alpha now is the Box
just containing the numbers zero and one that's
what we think is the poly nomial or poly number
1 plus Alpha sort of fundamentally it's just this
box with a zero and a one in it here is 1 + alpha
s here is 1 + Alpha cubed and you do the same
thing you look at all possible and you do the same
thing you look at all possible kinds of sums that
you can get by taking finite numbers of nonzero
entries here and you get a zero in one way you get
a one you get a two you get a three however in two
different ways and here I'm going to use that uh
notation I introduced some time ago we'll put a
little two as a left sub index here to denote
a multiplicity so instead of having to write
three three three different two different threes
I'll just write a three with a two underneath so
that means we have two threes floating around
and what are those two threes well we could
either take that three there or we could take
one and two four there are two ways of getting
that we choose the four here or we choose the 1
+ three and then there's three fives four sixes
5 sevens 68s 10 tens Etc so this is an alternate
way of thinking about representing the information
in this so let's stop and pause for a minute and
think I know this is you know very unfamiliar to
us but logically and uh you know objectively if we
can be um you know which is really more essential
you see when you're taking this these products
here okay we have these exponentials um first
of all there's the question if I ask an ordinary
mathematician you know what what do you mean by
Alpha here or in the usual story Q okay what
is Q well Q sometimes means this and sometimes
it means that and sometimes it means something
different okay and it's not so easy to say what
a variable is in mathematics even a a computer
scientist has some you know it's all kinds of
possible ambiguity as to what that term actually
means but for us this Alpha is just you know being
represented by this box with a one in it so
it's completely cut and dried and furthermore
when we do this multiplication like Alpha squ
time Alpha cubed okay that's Alpha to the 5th
but it's really an addition isn't it I mean yes
we're we're saying we're doing multiplication
but computationally it's really an addition
you know so what's happening here is closer
to the computational heart of what we're really
doing and moreover you can see that it's more
efficient to represent what's going on because
these Alphas in some way are extraneous right
they're not really essential part of the story
there sort of placeholders or or ways of pinning
uh these exponents uh to something but here there
are no alphas and also there are no plus signs
okay so just have a look at um you know the the
compression here right I mean in in this piece
of information I've compressed I think the data
a lot more efficiently so you know my guess is
that uh you know these little uh Tic Tacs that are
flying around in our neighborhood all these little
aliens perhaps that are living under the water
or whatever you know that we're soon probably
going to be um chatting with um you know in the
next few decades my guess is that you know this
might actually be more in keeping with what they
do we'll have to ask them when we start having
serious chats with them won't we and what about
that expression that happened in the denominator
of Oiler formula the 1 - Alpha * 1 - Alpha Cub
* 1 - Alpha 5th Etc product of 1us alpha is to
odd Powers so that turns out to be at least the
first few terms one - Alpha - Alpha Cub plus Alpha
4th - Alpha the 5th plus Alpha the 6 and so on in
some fashion which is not at all obvious so from
a box point of view this is 0 one anti box this is
a box with 03 anti there's a box with 0 five anti
and again we just do the all possible sums where
we're just taking finite numbers of um of entries
so never or more than a finite number of nonzero
entries so there's a single way of getting a zero
and there's a one anti there's a three anti there
is a four that's some one anti plus three anti is
four there's a five anti there it is there's a six
because the six is appearing uh not over here but
it's appearing as 1 anti plus 5 anti okay and
that's anti plus anti so that's just a regular
six and then there's a seven anti and then there's
28s and then two 9 anes 2 10 2 11 an Etc you can
kind of get the idea that the odd numbers are all
appearing with anes so that should also have an
ante and then the the identity that the the the
first product was equal to one over the second
product really amounts to uh the expression
that that first big box that we got times
this second big box that we got okay when we
multiply these two we should just get one so
that's a a remarkable thing okay so there's some
interesting but non-trivial pattern here there's
another interesting but non-trivial pattern
here okay so what happens when we multiply
these two things so 0+ 0 is 0 uh 0 + 1 uh and 0 +
1 anti so we get a one and a one anti they cancel
so there's no ones um twos there's a 0 plus two
that's two and one plus one anti is two anti so
that two and that two anti cancel threes uh well
there's two threes here so 0 + three there's two
of them so we get two threes here um but we also
get a a three anti here okay but we also get a one
anti plus a two that's another three an so all the
three anes cancel and the same thing happens with
every single natural number go through it every
single number is cancelled with something else
and at the end of the day the only thing that's
in this big product is the single zero that we
got by adding that zero and that zero so the Box
containing zero is one and that's the content of
Oilers identity so it's a an interesting alternate
way which one can argue Cuts closer to the chase
of what we're really doing arithmetically which
circumvent the need for elaborate discussion
about the roles of variables and which uh is
simpler notationally at least I think one can
argue that and um and it's fascinating that
these anti objects play an important role in
this arithmetic nevertheless you can say yes okay
so you're redoing something that's well known in
in a different way with different terminology
and that's right but in my next video I'm going
to give you another application of box arithmetic
to another aspect of number Theory actually also
a very important formula of Oilers having to do
with the reman zeta function and we're going to
see in this case a a highly non-trivial and
novel understanding of what's going on with
a very important number theoretical situation
by taking this box arithmetic point of view I
hope you'll join me for that I'm Norman
Wildberger thanks for [Music] listening